Add details on gradient methods to the quickstart (#1087)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/introduction/interfaces.rst

Gradients
---------

When creating a QNode, you can specify the :doc:`differentiation method
<glossary/quantum_differentiable_programming>` that PennyLane should use whenever the gradient of
that QNode is requested.

.. code-block:: python

    @qml.qnode(dev, diff_method="parameter-shift")
    def circuit(x):
        qml.RX(x, wires=0)
        return qml.probs(wires=0)

PennyLane currently provides the following differentiation methods for QNodes:

Simulation-based differentiation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following methods use `reverse accumulation
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_differentiation#Reverse_accumulation>`__ to compute
gradients; a well-known example of this approach is backpropagation. These methods are **not** hardware compatible; they are only supported on
*statevector* simulator devices such as :class:`default.qubit <~.DefaultQubit>`.

However, for rapid prototyping on simulators, these methods typically out-perform forward-mode
accumulators such as the parameter-shift rule and finite-differences. For more details, see the
:doc:`quantum backpropagation <demos/tutorial_backprop>` demonstration.

> * ``"backprop"``: Use standard backpropagation.

Reviewer: (minor) "backprop" uses imperative form in it's first line description (same with "parameter shift" and "device"), while neither "adjoint" nor "reversible" do. It might look slightly better to always use imperative here?

  This differentiation method is only allowed on simulator
  devices that are classically end-to-end differentiable, for example
  :class:`default.qubit <~.DefaultQubit>`. This method does *not* work on devices
  that estimate measurement statistics using a finite number of shots; please use
  the ``parameter-shift`` rule instead.

> * ``"adjoint"``: A form of backpropagation that takes advantage of the unitary or reversible

Author: ```suggestion
* ``"adjoint"``: Use a form of backpropagation that takes advantage of the unitary or reversible
```

  nature of quantum computation.

  The `adjoint method <https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.02823>`__  reverses through the circuit after a
  forward pass by iteratively applying the inverse (adjoint) gate. This method is similar to

>   ``"backprop"``, but trades off increased runtime with significantly lower memory usage.

Reviewer 2: Is this true? i.e., "trades off increased runtime with significantly lower memory usage"?
We saw on benchmarks that adjoint was faster, and I'm not sure if there's a complexity argument to say backprop is faster?

Note that this sentence seems closer to the one we have for reversible:
"The reversible approach is similar to backpropagation, but trades off extra computation for enhanced memory efficiency."

This is what we say for adjoint:
"This method is similar to the reversible method, but has a lower time overhead and a similar memory overhead."

Overall, I need to think about it, but I'm not sure if there is an occasion where reversible is preferable.

Author: @trbromley this is a good point. Do you have any suggestions we should change it to?

Reviewer 2: :thinking: Could we steer clear of making comparisons between the methods? I feel like probably only one option should be on offer eventually, with the others potentially available but not advertised. We could e.g., do a tutorial comparing?

But in the meantime, yes maybe we don't compare, or:
"This method is similar to ``"backprop"``, but has significantly lower memory usage and a similar runtime."

Actually, what is the runtime complexity of backprop?

Author: ```suggestion
  ``"backprop"``, but has significantly lower memory usage and a similar runtime.
```

> Actually, what is the runtime complexity of backprop?

I am not 100% sure. I know it tends to have a constant overhead compared to the forward pass, with an additional memory requirement during the forward pass due to storing intermediate computations

Reviewer 2: Great, yes if it has a constant overhead relative to the forward pass then it is similar complexity to the adjoint method, which is effectively 2 forward passes (one forward, one in reverse) - although I would need to think more carefully before being totally confident about this statement :laughing:.

Author: This definitely makes sense then --- with the adjoint method, we are not storing the intermediate computations (thus, less memory), _but_ we need to 'rewind' a few operations (thus, similar/slightly longer runtime)

> * ``"reversible"``: A form of backpropagation that takes advantage of the unitary or reversible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``"reversible"``: A form of differentiation that takes advantage of the unitary or reversible
```
Is it a form of backprop? (It might be, maybe I'm just confused)

Author: Ah... I believe that `reversible` is a form of backpropagation, in that backpropagation refers to reverse-mode gradient accumulation of a scalar-valued function?

> * ``"reversible"``: A form of backpropagation that takes advantage of the unitary or reversible

Author: ```suggestion
* ``"reversible"``: Use a form of backpropagation that takes advantage of the unitary or reversible
```

  nature of quantum computation.

>   This method is similar to the ``adjoint`` method, but has a slightly larger time overhead and a similar
>   memory overhead.
> 
>   Compared to the parameter-shift rule, the reversible method can be faster or slower, depending on
>   the density and location of parametrized gates in a circuit.

Reviewer: (minor) I personally think it looks better combining these two paragraphs into one.

```suggestion
  This method is similar to the ``adjoint`` method, but has a slightly larger time overhead and a similar
  memory overhead. Compared to the parameter-shift rule, the reversible method can be faster or slower,
  depending on the density and location of parametrized gates in a circuit.
```

Hardware-compatible differentiation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following methods support both quantum hardware and simulators, and are examples of `forward

> accumulation <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_differentiation#Forward_accumulation>`__

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
accumulation <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_differentiation#Forward_accumulation>`__.
```

However, when using a simulator, you may notice that the time required to compute the gradients
:doc:`scales quadratically <demos/tutorial_backprop>` with the number of trainable circuit
parameters.

* ``"parameter-shift"``: Use the analytic :doc:`parameter-shift rule
  <glossary/parameter_shift>` for all supported quantum operation arguments, with
  finite-difference as a fallback.

> * ``"finite-diff"``: Uses numerical finite-differences for all quantum operation arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``"finite-diff"``: Use numerical finite-differences for all quantum operation arguments.
```

Device gradients
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``"device"``: Queries the device directly for the gradient.
  Only allowed on devices that provide their own gradient computation.

.. note::

    If not specified, the default differentiation method is ``diff_method="best"``. PennyLane
    will attempt to determine the *best* differentiation method given the device and interface.
    Typically, PennyLane will prioritize device-provided gradients, backpropagation, parameter-shift

>     rule, and finally finite-differences, in that order.

Reviewer 2: We can revisit this when adjoint becomes the default.

Training and interfaces
-----------------------

The bridge between the quantum and classical worlds is provided in PennyLane via *interfaces*.
Currently, there are four built-in interfaces: :doc:`NumPy <interfaces/numpy>`, :doc:`PyTorch
<interfaces/torch>`, :doc:`JAX <interfaces/jax>`, and :doc:`TensorFlow <interfaces/tf>`. These
interfaces make each of these libraries quantum-aware, allowing quantum circuits to be treated just

> like any other operation.

Reviewer: (minor) Below, it says: `(NumPy arrays, Torch Tensors, or TensorFlow Tensors)`. Might make more sense to use lowercase for `Tensors`, since it refers to the type/word tensor, rather than the `Tensor` object, right? 🤔

.. _intro_interfaces:

Gradients and training
======================

PennyLane offers seamless integration between classical and quantum computations. Code up quantum
circuits in PennyLane, compute :doc:`gradients of quantum circuits <glossary/quantum_gradient>`, and
connect them easily to the top scientific computing and machine learning libraries.

Gradients
---------

When creating a QNode, you can specify the :doc:`differentiation method
<glossary/quantum_differentiable_programming>` that PennyLane should use whenever the gradient of
that QNode is requested.

.. code-block:: python

    @qml.qnode(dev, diff_method="parameter-shift")
    def circuit(x):
        qml.RX(x, wires=0)
        return qml.probs(wires=0)

> PennyLane currently provides the following differentiation methods for QNodes, divided into
> the following categories.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PennyLane currently provides the following differentiation methods for QNodes:
```
(repetition of word "following")

Simulation-based differentiation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following methods use `reverse accumulation
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_differentiation#Reverse_accumulation>`__ to compute

> gradients; a well-known example of this approach is backpropagation. These methods only support
> state-vector simulators, they are **not** hardware compatible; they are only supported on
> *statevector* simulator devices such as :class:`default.qubit <~.DefaultQubit>`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
gradients; a well-known example of this approach is backpropagation. These methods are **not** hardware compatible; they are only supported on
*statevector* simulator devices such as :class:`default.qubit <~.DefaultQubit>`.
```

.. _intro_interfaces:

> Gradients and training

Reviewer: I would lean towards "Gradients and interfaces" as well here.

> Gradients and training

Author: ```suggestion
Gradients and interfaces
```

Although be good to get @mariaschuld's thoughts before switching it!

> Gradients and training

Reviewer 3: I really like training, because, the interfaces _do_ the training...it describes the page by what it is used for, not by a technical PL lingo term.

> Gradients and training

Author: I agree. 'Gradients and Training' will mean something to new users looking to learn PL, and as a side effect they'll learn what 'interface' means.

Whereas 'Gradients and Interfaces' is a bit more esoteric sounding.

> ======================

Reviewer 3: Like that!

PennyLane offers seamless integration between classical and quantum computations. Code up quantum

> circuits in PennyLane, compute :doc:`quantum gradients <glossary/quantum_gradient>`, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
circuits in PennyLane, compute :doc:`gradients of quantum circuits <glossary/quantum_gradient>`, and
```
just a suggestion...I realised that "quantum + word" is actually quite confusing. What is quantum about the gradient, does it contain a special kind of magic gradient? So trying to be explicit where possible.

connect them easily to the top scientific computing and machine learning libraries.

Gradients
---------

When creating a QNode, you can specify the :doc:`differentiation method
<glossary/quantum_differentiable_programming>` that PennyLane should use whenever the gradient of
that QNode is requested.

.. code-block:: python

    @qml.qnode(dev, diff_method="parameter-shift")
    def circuit(x):
        qml.RX(x, wires=0)
        return qml.probs(wires=0)

PennyLane currently provides the following differentiation methods for QNodes, divided into

> the following three categories.

Reviewer: Maybe reword this so that "following" is only used once. Something like: "PennyLane provides a few different differentiation methods for QNodes, divided into the following categories."

.. note::

    If not specified, the default differentiation method is ``diff_method="best"``. PennyLane
    will attempt to determine the *best* differentiation method given the device and interface.

>     Typically, PennyLane will prioritize device-provided gradients, backpropagation, parameter-shift

Author: I just wanted to provide a buffer in case the logic ever does something more complicated 😆

>     rule, and finally finite-differences, in that order.

Reviewer 3: I would move this note to the bottom of section, one is expecting the three items now.

Device gradients

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 3: Would move this to last, it is the least useable case...

Author: done!

* ``"device"``: Queries the device directly for the gradient.
  Only allowed on devices that provide their own gradient computation.

> Reverse-mode differentiation

Reviewer 2: What about "Simulation-based differentiation"? Although I could be persuaded for reverse mode, but I'm worried it could be confusing.

Author: Nice, changed this!

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 3: What about "Gradients from simulators" or "simulator-only gradients" and below "Hardware-compatible gradients"?

Author: Oh, yes good idea. I think this is nicer and more relevant.

Author: Went with "Simulation-based differentiation" as per Tom's suggestion!

The following methods only support state-vector simulators, they are **not** hardware compatible;
they are only supported on *statevector* simulator devices such as :class:`default.qubit
<~.DefaultQubit>`.

However, for rapid prototyping on simulators, these methods typically out-perform forward-mode
accumulators such as the parameter-shift rule and finite-differences. For more details, see the
:doc:`quantum backpropagation <demos/tutorial_backprop>` demonstration.

* ``"backprop"``: Use standard backpropagation.

  This differentiation method is only allowed on simulator
  devices that are classically end-to-end differentiable, for example

>   :class:`default.qubit <~.DefaultQubit>`. This method does *not* work on devices

Reviewer 2: Are we purposely simplifying here (i.e., hiding the fact we swap out `default.qubit` for its differentiable versions)? I think it makes sense... :thinking:

Reviewer: I think that makes sense as well, since this is only a simplified overview.

Author: Yep, I'm purposely simplifying :) I think this is a case where providing the full details will just be more confusing.

I'm thinking we should move towards a case where `default.qubit.tf` etc. are no longer mentioned; instead, we simply refer to `default.qubit` supporting tf, autograd, jax.

  that estimate measurement statistics using a finite number of shots; please use
  the ``parameter-shift`` rule instead.

* ``"adjoint"``: A form of backpropagation that takes advantage of the unitary or reversible
  nature of quantum computation.

  The `adjoint method <https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.02823>`__  reverses through the circuit after a
  forward pass by iteratively applying the inverse (adjoint) gate. This method is similar to
  ``"backprop"``, but trades off increased runtime with significantly lower memory usage.

> * ``"reversible"``: A form of backpropagation that takes advantage of the unitary or reversible

Reviewer 3: Reverse-mode and reversible could be confused..

> * ``"reversible"``: A form of backpropagation that takes advantage of the unitary or reversible

Author: Not yet :( We should add a page to the glossary section, that goes through the mathematics and has examples.

  nature of quantum computation.

>   This method is similar to the ``adjoint`` method, but has a lower time overhead and a similar

Author: ```suggestion
  This method is similar to the ``adjoint`` method, but has a slightly larger time overhead and a similar
```

>   memory overhead.

Reviewer 3: One would wonder why we should use `adjoint` at all then?

Author: Oh good catch, this is wrong. Should be 'has a _larger_ time overhead' 🤦

Reviewer 3: Wait but if it is similar on memory and slower, why would one use it?

>   memory overhead.

Reviewer 2: It seems like these have been swapped :thinking: Isn't it the adjoint method that is similar to backprop, but with lower time overhead and similar memory overhead?

  Compared to the parameter-shift rule, the reversible method can be faster or slower, depending on
  the density and location of parametrized gates in a circuit.

Forward-mode differentiation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following methods support both quantum hardware and simulators. However, when using a simulator,

> you may notice that the computational time required to compute the gradients scales

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you may notice that the time required to compute the gradients scales
```

> with the number of trainable circuit parameters.

Reviewer 2: It's also true that the time scales with number of params for methods like adjoint. Could we just say that it may be slower on a simulator to use forward mode?

Author: Wait really? I didn't know that. I thought the adjoint method was a reverse accumulator, in that it scales with the dimension of the output, not the input of the function being differentiated?

Author: Oh, there is a slightly subtlety here I think?

for a function R^m -> R^n, 

* forward accumulators (finite diff, param shift) require `m` quantum evaluations.

* Reverse accumulators instead require 'n' quantum evaluations (this can be seen somewhat from the line

  ```python
  lambdas = [self._apply_operation(lambda_, op) for lambda_ in lambdas]
  ```

  in the adjoint logic, where `len(lambda) ~ tape.output_dim`).

But the reverse accumulators will still somewhat scale with the number of parameters insomuch as more parameters = deeper circuits? And in the adjoint case, more generators to compute?

Author: Changed this sentence to 'scales quadratically' to be more specific.

* ``"parameter-shift"``: Use the analytic :doc:`parameter-shift rule
  <glossary/parameter_shift>` for all supported quantum operation arguments, with
  finite-difference as a fallback.

* ``"finite-diff"``: Uses numerical finite-differences for all quantum operation arguments.

Training and interfaces
-----------------------

The bridge between the quantum and classical worlds is provided in PennyLane via *interfaces*.

> Currently, there are four built-in interfaces: NumPy, PyTorch, JAX, and TensorFlow. These interfaces

Reviewer 3: Links? :)

Author: done!

    If no interface is specified, PennyLane will default to the NumPy interface (powered by the
    `autograd <https://github.com/HIPS/autograd>`_ library).

.. note::

    QNodes with an interface will always incur a small overhead on evaluation. If you do not
    need to compute quantum gradients of a QNode, specifying ``interface=None`` will remove
    this overhead and result in a slightly faster evaluation. However, gradients will no
    longer be available.

> 

Author: I'm on the fence over whether to include this or not. It might be overcomplicated for the quickstart landing page.

Reviewer 3: It's a note, it will be great. I use quickstart all the time as a reference.

Reviewer 3: I'd move it to the bottom of the page though?

Reviewer 2: I like it too!

Author: Have moved it to the bottom of the page!

    pennylane.qnn.KerasLayer
    pennylane.qnn.TorchLayer

.. note::

    QNodes with an interface will always incur a small overhead on evaluation. If you do not
    need to compute quantum gradients of a QNode, specifying ``interface=None`` will remove
    this overhead and result in a slightly faster evaluation. However, gradients will no

>     longer be available.

Reviewer: 💯
